Table of Contents
─────────────────

1. Introduction
.. 1. 1.1 Background and Motivation
.. 2. Outline
.. 3. Objectives
.. 4. Applications
.. 5. Scope of the project
.. 6. Introduction to Sockets
.. 7. Client-Sever Background
2. Literature Review
3. Proposed System Architecture
4. Methodology
.. 1. Network Programming
.. 2. IP Addresses (IPv4 and IPv6)
.. 3. Port Numbers
.. 4. Server and Client
.. 5. Event Loop
.. 6. Data Structure:Hashtables
.. 7. Data Serialization
.. 8. The AVL Tree
.. 9. Event Loop and Timers
5. Scope and Applications
6. Time Estimation
7. Feasibility Analysis
8. References
9. What would be done:


1 Introduction
══════════════

1.1 1.1 Background and Motivation
─────────────────────────────────

  Today in the age of Internet, communication has been one of the major
  technological development of the last decade that has created waves
  across the market.  The internet penetration is increasing day by day
  across the world so is social media penetration.  Chatting whether
  that be text-based or an audio/video call has become the major
  necessity making the founders billionaire.

  Instant messaging has been on the rise since the early inception of
  the internet.  Its simplicity and effectiveness is the main reason of
  it being used by everybody.

  With advancement of technology, different companies came up with
  different ideas to attract users into their platform.  To win this
  race different companies had different approach with the attempt to
  capture the market.  With this rivalry, we came across groud-breaking
  innovation. With all the positive, the race also brought many problems
  along with them.  Data security, misinformation, manipulating users
  sentiments, addictiveness being few of them.

  To overcome all of this and remain away from these highly
  dis-organized messaging service, we have come up the CLI based chat
  application which is purpose driven, specific to communication.  It
  also provides different layers to maintain users privacy, data
  security and an inclusive and minimilistic user interface.


1.2 Outline
───────────

  This project is started with the approach of understanding how
  communication systems works in lower-level. We have decided to build
  it from scratch because it will teach us how different protocols,
  server-side communication works.  It will help us dive deeper into
  understanding communication systems rather than building it in
  application level.  Though, we have different libraries and APIs to
  handle this but our goal is to go beyond these high level stuff and
  understand these terminologies from grass-root level like socket
  programming, different protocols, multithreading etc.  We will be
  building a minimilistic CLI based chat application which will handle
  multi-user communication channels. We will have two layers one being
  the highly anonymous layer where you can join a channel by entering
  username and chat with other people on the channel in live time.  And
  other layer being the private groups which will need user
  authentication inorder to talk in the channels.


1.3 Objectives
──────────────

  • To showcase the use of different communication protocols.
  • To create user-friendly chatting application.
  • To protect user privacy.
  • To learn how data is stored, retrieved from database using various
    algorithm.


1.4 Applications
────────────────

  • It can be used for daily communication without having to worry about
    login and data security.
  • It can be used to maintain user-groups to network with like minded
    people.


1.5 Scope of the project
────────────────────────

  It will invite users who love the concept of minimilism. It will have
  user-friendly and simple to use interface where people can come start
  texting within minute if not seconds.  It will guarantee user data
  security and we are also expecting different encryption techniques as
  the next step of this project to maintain user privacy. It will
  completely be add-less away from the distraction that all messaging
  service brings.  It will invite completely focused people who are
  trying to have a fruitful communication rather than roam here and
  there like in other messaging services.


  Why From Scratch?
  • To learn Deeper
  • We can build different technologies on top of this


1.6 Introduction to Sockets
───────────────────────────

  • What is socket Programming?
  • File descriptors–> integer value associated with the creation of
    socket used to represent the created socket
    • different syscall
  • sockets are a way to speak to other programs using standard unix
    file descriptors.
    • everything in unix is a file. explain Stream Sockets Datagram
      Sockets stream sockets uses TCP IP deals with routing
  -IPv4 IPv6 Port Numbers Byte Order

  • Hello server/client int fd = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, 0);
    AF_INET is for IPv4, use AF_INET6 for IPv6 or dual-stack socket. For
    simplicity, we’ll just use AF_INET throughout this book.
    SOCK_STREAM is for TCP


1.7 Client-Sever Background
───────────────────────────


2 Literature Review
═══════════════════


3 Proposed System Architecture
══════════════════════════════

  We are building a CLI based chat application to communicate in real
  time. We are following client-server model. It will have two
  layers. In the first layer, client can connect to the server and
  connect to the channel to which it want to connect. Once they are
  inside the channel client can chat with other clients in the
  channel. Text is the only communication medium this chat app will
  support. Once the user leaves the channel, the connection to the
  server will be lost. Clinet will again have to join the channel to
  communicate with other clients.  In the second layer, we are
  implementing database into the chat app. This layer will have user
  authentication to join the server. User can join channels and
  communicate. User's data will be stored into the database. With
  addition of database, we are eliminating the problem of having to join
  channels everytime you open the app. Though, this layer won't be
  anonymous and reveal user's identity to other people on the
  server. This layer gives the freedom of creating closed channels
  between communities, friends or family members.


4 Methodology
═════════════

4.1 Network Programming
───────────────────────

  • Introduction to Sockets sockets are the means of communication
    between different programs using standard unix file descriptors.  It
    follows the principle everything everything in unix is a file which
    means that when a system does input/output operations they do it by
    reading or writing to a file descriptor.  File Descriptors are the
    non-negative integers that are associated with the open file where
    file can be a file, network connection,software or anything which
    helps to identify resources in an operating system.  We will call
    socket() to get the socket descriptor and use different system calls
    like send(), recv() instead of read(), write() which makes data
    transmission easy.

    // We can use lsof to see file descriptors in our system.  In our
    CLI chat app, socket is used to communicate between server and
    client.  In chat application, we have multiple users who wants to
    connect to the central server. Inorder to handle this, we have
    sockets which is used to establish connections between client and
    server.  The sever will create a socket and bind IP address and port
    number and listens for connections from client. Client will also
    create a socket and connect to the server's IP addresses and port
    number.  Once a client is connected to the server, another socket is
    created in sever side to handle communication with the client. After
    the connection is made, client can send messages to the server and
    then server can process the information as required.


  • There are mainly two types of sockets.  Stream Sockets and Datagram
     Sockets.  Stream sockets are reliable two-way connected
     communication streams. Eg:telnet or ssh, http.  In stream sockets
     data arrive in order.  TCP : is how stream sockets achieve this
     level of data transmission quality and also IP for routing.
     Datagram Sockets are sometimes called connectionless sockets.  In
     Datagram Sockets data doesn't arrive in order.  They use IP for
     routing but don't use TCP they use UDP (user datagram protocol)


  In short, Socket are the means of communication between clinet and
  server in our application which will help us to establish
  communication in real time.


4.2 IP Addresses (IPv4 and IPv6)
────────────────────────────────

  IP address is an unique identifier for every device connected to the
  internet. Ip addresses are used by routers to transmit data between
  different devices.  There are two types of IP addresses which are IPv4
  and IPv6.  IPv4 uses 32-bit addresses whereas IPv6 uses 128 bit
  addresses. The need of IPv6 was realized later when the devices in the
  world were increasing rapidly and IPv4 could only generate about 4
  billion unique addresses.  IPv6 can generate millions of IPv4 unique
  addresses which is almost impossible to have that amount of devices.
  IPv4 are commonly written in dots and numbers.  192.0.0.112 IPv6 are
  written using hexadecimal representation with each two bite chunk
  seperated by colon.  2001:0db8:85a3:0000:0000:8a2e:0370:7334 We will
  be using IPv6 addresses in our project to identify devices.


4.3 Port Numbers
────────────────

  Port number is an integer value used to indentify processes in a
  system. We have IP addresses to identify the devices but if we want
  our system to handle multiple process/service, we will have have to
  use port numbers to distinguish between the multiple processes.


4.4 Server and Client
─────────────────────

  A server is a computer that provides resources/services to different
  devices in the network which are known as clients.  Server accepts
  connections from clients and handle different processes as specified.

  A client is a device that requests resources/services from the server.
  Client connects to the server.  In this age,almost every program in
  the network run on the client sever model.

  In our CLI based chat application, we are also using this model in
  which sever handles the communication between clients.  It runs on one
  of the machine and waits for incoming connections on specific
  port. Once the connection is made, it facilitates the chatting between
  multiple clients.  Whereas clients participates in the chatting
  process by connecting to server by specifying IP address.  Once the
  connection is established, client can send messages, the server
  receives the messages and broadcast to other client in the channel.
  Server will also handle user authentication in the second layer of our
  application.


4.5 Event Loop
──────────────

  There are 3 ways to deal with concurrent connections in server-side
  network programming. They are: forking, multi-threading, and event
  loops. Forking creates new processes for each client connection to
  achieve concurrency. Multi-threading uses threads instead of
  processes. An event loop uses polling and nonblocking IO and usually
  runs on a single thread. Due to the overhead of processes and threads,
  most modern production-grade software uses event loops for networking.

  In socket programming, an event loop is a mechanism that allows you to
  handle multiple simultaneous socket connections efficiently. It's
  commonly used in network applications where a server needs to handle
  multiple client connections concurrently.

  The event loop works by continuously monitoring the state of multiple
  sockets and dispatching events based on their availability for reading
  or writing. It allows the server to perform non-blocking I/O
  operations and efficiently handle multiple connections without the
  need for creating individual threads or processes for each connection.


4.6 Data Structure:Hashtables
─────────────────────────────


4.7 Data Serialization
──────────────────────


4.8 The AVL Tree
────────────────


4.9 Event Loop and Timers
─────────────────────────


5 Scope and Applications
════════════════════════


6 Time Estimation
═════════════════


7 Feasibility Analysis
══════════════════════


8 References
════════════


9 What would be done:
═════════════════════

  In the project we will be working on the electrons highest probability
  to be found on the orbital. As we all are familiar with the concept of
  atom,electron and orbitals, It is very important to know what is the
  position of electron in an atom. This concept came around 1920 after
  Albert Einstein presented his Relativity and then Heisenberg came up
  with the “UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE” and later Schrodinger came up with
  Wave Equation which later gave birth to Quantum Mechanics. Planck is
  known as the father of Quantum Mechanics but the theory became popular
  in 1930s and credit goes to Heisenberg and Schrodinger. As this model
  deals with the subatomic particles and tries to explain one of the
  difficult phenomenon of Physics and it says Position and Momentum are
  uncertain if we try to calculate simultaneously.  The main purpose of
  our project is to try to find the maximum probability of finding
  electrons in an orbital. We will explain the wave function both
  theoretically and graphically. For this we will be taking hydrogen and
  we will find the wave function and probability distribution of
  hydrogen from ground level.  As long as the electron is bound to the
  atom, we will not be able to say much more about its position than
  that it is in the atom. Certainly all models of the atom which
  describe the electron as a particle following a definite trajectory or
  orbit must be discarded.  We can obtain an energy and one or more
  wavefunctions for every value of the principal quantum number, by
  solving Schrodinger's equation for the hydrogen atom. A knowledge of
  the wavefunctions, or probability amplitudes, allows us to calculate
  the probability distributions for the electron in any given quantum
  level. When the principal quantum number is given the wave function
  and the derived probability function are independent of direction and
  depend only on the distance between the electron and the nucleus. We
  will plot graph showing the variation in the functions as the electron
  is moved further and further from the nucleus in any one direction.
  We will also have a live demonstration on how to create the 2-D
  histogram and analyse the data in ROOT and find out where there is
  maximum and where there is minimum probability of finding an
  electron. We will also try to simplify Schrodinger's wave function as
  simply as possible.


  How it will be done: We will start the explanation along with
  uncertainty principle and explain the phenomenon followed by different
  examples and try to elaborate them .As we have many theories to
  explain, first we will go with the theories and explain then will head
  toward the examples.The quantum mechanical model will also be
  explained theoretically. We will be taking the data of electrons by
  CERN(As the actual data is required for valid result) and plotting
  them with the help of “ROOTS'' application which is the software used
  by CERN to calculate the data in LHC (Large Hadron Collider) too and
  has many features for data analysis like calculators and can also be
  used for not only making graphs but also for making histograms of
  different dimensions.For this we will take the Crude Approximation of
  Electron in the position of a hydrogen Atom.(ie the graphs of the wave
  function ,radial distribution of function for the ground state
  hydrogen atom and probability distribution, will be made with the help
  of roots including other graphs taking different things into
  consideration such as data and so on ). We will also be doing review
  of the models that are presented . We will try to include more things
  as possible to make the project more interesting.  Why It should be
  done: Since it is a really interesting topic to do the project on
  physics which deals with one of the most interesting branches on
  physics which is “Quantum mechanics” as well as it is the common
  interest of our team members.  We have learnt about the “Root primer”
  (Which is a data analysis framework) in the workshop on Particle
  physics. We thought that, It would be great to use what we have
  learnt. It can also be a great source of knowledge for us all. In the
  18 19th century physics evolved so much but we didn’t have the proper
  explanation to define the behavior of sub-atomic particles as well as
  other particles. 1905-1920 was the period of Einstein where he tried
  to explain the behavior of heavy particles. And the era of Quantum
  Mechanics began in which Hesienberg and Schrondinger had the major
  contribution. Though it is one of the best phenomena in physics and
  people leave it just because of seeing the long equations. So, we want
  to make this topic as interesting as possible. It is also an
  educational activity. It can be a source of knowledge to all and
  develop interests in people . Our small effort can pave us our paths
  to do more reachearches in future and find more as well as o f
  observers.we have done some research on it as well so this project can
  be a unique learning process for us . Learning is just not all about
  study but it also about fun. This project means a lot to us and
  despite learning we want to enjoy it together as a team and have
  experiences of working together as a team .That's why we want this
  project to be done and we look forward to doing this project .
